= MetaTypes

This is like {hstore}[http://railscasts.com/episodes/345-hstore] on steroids ;) It actually uses hstore for storage.

There is a {demo app on heroku}[http://meta-types.herokuapp.com/] ({code is here}[https://github.com/no-dashes/meta_types_demo])

== Mission Objective

As in the railscast mentioned above, you frequently get in the situation to store values in the database without knowing the exact structure of the required data in advance. This is one of the really cool features of NoSQL databases like MongoDB.

We often find that we need to configure the structure interactively. In traditional SQL databases, the {EAV-Pattern}[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Entity–attribute–value_model] (or antipattern, rather), is used, for example to configure product types in {Magento}[http://www.magentocommerce.com/]. This leads to zillions of tables and to <b>really ugly</b> queries, which need to be aggressively cached for performance reasons.

Postgres offers THE SOLUTION to this problem, and we tried to make usage as simple as possible.

This is currently quite work-in-progress... Let's see how things evolve :)

== Usage

Create a table that has a <tt>yourcoice_hstore</tt> column, in this case, we use <tt>properties_hstore</tt>

  class CreateThings < ActiveRecord::Migration
    def change
      execute <<-SQL
        create table things(
          id      serial primary key,
          meta_type_id integer references meta_types(id),
          title    character varying,
          properties_hstore hstore,
          created_at timestamp without time zone,
          updated_at timestamp without time zone
        )
      SQL
    end
  end

in the corresponding class, we declare that we want to mount the meta_type information with the name <tt>properties</tt>.

  class Thing < ActiveRecord::Base
    attr_accessible :titile, :meta_type

    meta_typed :properties

  end

Then, get the necessary migrations:

  $ rake meta_types:install:migrations

which installs the create table migrations for <tt>meta_type</tt>, <tt>meta_type_property</tt> and the mapping table <tt>meta_type_member</tt>.

We then define a <tt>MetaType</tt>: (<tt>sid</tt> is string-id ;))

  typ = MetaType.new(sid: 'address', title: 'My Fancy Address')
  typ.meta_type_properties = [
    MetaTypeProperty.new(
      sid:               'age',
      label:             'Age',
      property_type_sid: 'integer',
      default_value:     '10'
    ),
    MetaTypeProperty.new(
      sid:               'name',
      label:             'Name',
      property_type_sid: 'string'
    ),
    MetaTypeProperty.new(
      sid:               'gender',
      label:             'Gender',
      property_type_sid: 'string',
      choices:           'male||female||other'
    ),
    MetaTypeProperty.new(
      sid:               'active',
      label:             'Active',
      property_type_sid: 'boolean',
      default_value:     'true'
    )
  ]

the available types for <tt>property_type_sid</tt> are
* integer
* string
* text (multi-line stings, the only difference is the way that simple_form renders the input)
* boolean
* float
* date

If the <tt>choices</tt> are set, <tt>simple_form</tt> can easily offer an select-box as input. The individual values are separated by ||.

You can now use the defined <tt>meta_type</tt> to add the defined attributes to another model:

  thing = Thing.new(title: "MetaTypes Rock!", meta_type: typ)
  assert thing.save

the defined attributes are available on the <tt>properties</tt> pseudo-relation of the <tt>thing</tt>, e.g.:

  thing.properties.age == 10
  thing.properties.active == true

and using <tt>properties[sid]</tt>, you can access the <tt>MetaPeroperty</tt> object encapsulating the actual data and attribute definition, e.g.:

  thing.properties[:age].value == 10
  thing.properties[:active].value == true
  thing.properties[:active].label == 'Active'
  thing.properties[:active].sid == 'active'

the properties can be set using

  thing.properties.name = "Ryan Bates ;)"
  thing.properties.gender = "male"

'Mass Assignment' also works so that you can construct a form like that:

  <%= simple_form_for @thing do |f| %>
    <%= f.input :meta_type_id, as: :hidden %>
    <%= f.input :name %>
    <%= f.fields_for :properties do |ff| %>
      <% @thing.properties.each do |prop| %>
        <%= ff.input prop.sid, collection: prop.choices, label: prop.label %>
      <% end %>
    <% end %>
    <%= f.submit %>
  <% end %>

or programmatically:

  thing = Thing.new(
    title: "Har har",
    meta_type: typ,
    properties_attributes: {
      age:  125,
      name: 'Methusalix',
      gender: 'male',
      active: true
    }
  )

The same works with <tt>update_attributes</tt> so that no special care needs to be taken in the controllers.

== Querying/Finding

To allow easy finding, we add methods to the <tt>meta_typed</tt> model:

  Thing.where_properties(age: 10)
  Thing.where_properties_like(name: '%salix%')

They may of course be chained for they are just ARels on <tt>Thing</tt>

== How is it done?

In the <tt>hstore</tt> column, the properties are saved in the form

  sid -> value

where <tt>sid</tt> is the sid of the <tt>meta_type_property</tt> and the value (can only be a string in the db) is automatically converted.

== Demo App (seriously!)

There is a {demo app on heroku}[http://meta-types.herokuapp.com/] ({code is here}[https://github.com/no-dashes/meta_types_demo])

== Bugs!

There are roughly another 997 bugs in meta_types, although we do some testing (see <tt>test/</tt>). So if you hunt them, please let me know using the {GitHub Bugtracker}[https://github.com/metaminded/meta_types/issues].

== Contributing to meta_types

* Check out the latest master to make sure the feature hasn't been implemented or the bug hasn't been fixed yet
* Check out the {issue tracker}[https://github.com/metaminded/meta_types/issues] to make sure someone already hasn't requested it and/or contributed it
* Fork the project
* Start a feature/bugfix branch
* Commit and push until you are happy with your contribution
* Make sure to add tests for it. This is important so I don't break it in a future version unintentionally.
* Please try not to mess with the Rakefile, version, or history. If you want to have your own version, or is otherwise necessary, that is fine, but please isolate to its own commit so I can cherry-pick around it.
* Feel free to send a pull request if you think others (me, for example) would like to have your change incorporated into future versions of meta_types.

== License

Copyright (c) 2012 Peter Horn, {metaminded UG}[http://www.metaminded.com]

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
